in a way the Palestinians do represent
the whole world and I think through
immense Carnage and unspeakable
sacrifice maybe Palestinians watching
all of this can change the entire
[Music]
world taking Center Stage today is Peter
oborn a respected journalist and
political commentator he's authored a
number of books including the rise of
political lying and the Triumph of the
political class he was the former Chief
political commentator of the Delhi
Telegraph and writes a political column
for Middle East eye in today's episode
he discusses the role of the media in
shaping The Narrative around the war on
Gaza and the growing divide in the west
between the political stance and the
public opinion Peter oor uh thank you
very much for joining us for Center
Stage it's an honor to have you here um
I'd like to start this conversation on
off with a few of your words now you
said at times of Crisis the job of the
Statesman is to resolve problems not
inflame them to show wisdom and to
ignore popular clamor to remind all
parties of their obligations under
international law so my question to you
is how have Western governments handled
this situation since October 7th I'm
afraid the uh West governments have
disgraced themselves um being British uh
to see a Rishi sunak the British prime
minister go to uh T Aviv after leading
Israeli politicians have started to make
really
terrifying genocidal statements and say
we are
unequivocally with uh with the state of
Israel of course it was right for Mr
sunak as British prime minister to go
and express his immense sympathy and and
love for the uh the people who died and
express his shock and horror and express
support but just given
unequivocal
support um was the wrong language he
should the a
Statesman would have gone and said look
you have to respond but no uh be wary
don't commit war crimes don't kill
innocent
civilians uh and that is what the uh
British and other Prime Ministers around
the world did the President Biden has
been
particularly has been a tragic figure
I'm
afraid in this uh business where he's
questioned the statistics of the people
killed in Gaza he's
um gone on giving sort of un sort of
immense sort of military aid He has
blocked I mean I think this last few
days have been horrible the blocking of
the humanitarian ceasa by the US
president uh I think this is turning
into one of the darkest moments in
American
history well they do have the elections
coming up next year as well for
2024 how will this
affect Biden's Run next year well I'm
not an expert on American uh politics
but you read well you also have the UK
elections next year we have we do indeed
um well let's in that case just have a
little brief
glance a at Kama the labor of the
opposition which is the great um
Progressive Party in Britain and of
course uh sakir is a very distinguished
uh human rights lawyer and this
disastrous moment which I think will
come to haunt him for the rest of his
life when he was asked if he supported
Collective punishment um which the
Israelis were talking about very early
on you know deprivation of food water
and he said yes they have the right to
do that it was
horrifying to hear K stard he had an
opportunity as the leader of the labor
party in Britain to be a standing rebuke
to Rishi sunx
slavish support for the for the actions
of the IDF and the Israeli State and he
and he didn't take it he didn't know how
to take it and so there is it was a
matter of Despair at that point
for the conduct of the British political
class and of course the British media
class the newspapers as well well let's
talk about the um the political class
and the ongoing divide with its people
and I think what's been interesting to
see is that you have hundreds and
thousands of people in support of
Palestine but when it comes to the
political class it's the total opposite
so what's this saying about the gap
between the politicians politicians or
the the government and the people and
not just in Britain but in the Western
Hemisphere yeah I've been on uh the
March marches my wife my daughters have
been on the March is and to be called by
a British H secretary soel bravman hate
Marchers um is
unforgivable it was framed uh as the
Palestinians were
terrorists uh the enemies of all
everything that is
decent and all we were doing was
Marching for
peace and so
that I mean we've seen the horrific
images and you know marching so that
babies wouldn't be killed
bombed and to be and so there is a and
this kind of language by sella braan the
Home Secretary was supported by um by
the Prime Minister it was and if you
read the newspapers it's reported there
you know the the Marchers get vilified a
tiny little episode you know every March
that ever been attracts some people who
go slightly you know behave badly and
that gets massive they'll focus in
they'll zoom in on that one who's acted
badly and then tar a brush with the rest
and it's unfair so what you have if you
look at the opinion polls is you know
you have 70% of of people wanting a
ceasefire British people very
sympathetic to the uh plight of the
Palestinians and yet the mainstream
media it's almost 100% behind the
Israeli
bombardment and the mainstream
politicians are 100% that labor and Tory
behind the Israeli bombardment and this
shows a a a terrifying Gulf it it
reminds me in some ways of the Iraq
War um and uh when when we got these
magn these marches then against the
invasion of Iraq a and these were very
powerful
moments and uh Tony Blair of course the
ven prime minister paid a a very high
price in terms of his reputation and I
think
Briton paid a very P high price for
being slavish to the United States but
nothing's change well we are well we we
are paying that price again because we
are
clearly I'm very proud to be British or
I
was and uh I felt I always believed that
being British means being decent
fair-minded observing the rule of law
and actually the thing most of all is
supporting the
underdog yes the Brits are known to go
for The Underdogs whether it's in life
sport anything but on this occasion it
seems to be the total opposite and so
what our
government is
shocking um and I don't think they
represent the British people people but
they do represent Britain I
listened very carefully to Antonio G
Gutierrez and of all the other speakers
but what he was saying he was so angry
about the
ceasefire that the UN had been General
Assembly had been ignored and he said
he's going to go on trying but what I
think he was
doing was saying to
Biden this is on you let's imagine that
the Law Courts decided
decide it's a
genocide President
Biden's decision to veto a humanitarian
ceasa would mean that America has aided
and abetted a
genocide Now isn't that a moment of
total shame it should be well it will be
I mean I we can't say I'm just and so
that was a terrible moment in American
history the same
I'm afraid I was a
Brit I didn't like Britain abstaining
it's an act of moral CES so why why did
they I mean they know that their people
aren't happy with what they're doing so
why why aren't they listening to them
they see they see what's happening but
they're going against it what they say
is uh there's two things let what they
say is that the statement should have
had a condemnation of of
Hamas as well but look think of it like
this as we speak and it's so horrifying
I can't sometime as we speak there are
children dying in the rubble it's chaos
Carnage in
Gaza and yet because of a little
technicality the
British the British can't what is
effectively technicality in the in the
face of there Calamity happening at the
moment the British have to abstain
because of the the lack of any sense of
morality from Britain and the United
States it's a very uh profound moments I
think I want to turn our attentions
to the role of the media the media the
public and politics now um when you're
watching the coverage I just want to
know what you've been fearful about what
what are your views on it when you've
watched I don't know Al jazer CNN BBC
well how has it played a part in again
contributing to The Divide I mean we've
seen an increase in people being
attacked they've been anti-semitic or
islamophobic it's there's been no say no
peace but I suppose the media could have
played a part in there I mean what do
you think
about the role of the media in that
respects look this is an ancient this is
the long ongoing problem is that the
media vilifies uh
minorities um and we have seen a rise of
of anti-Semitism and also islamophobia
or anti- Palestinian
anti-arab uh stuff and and it's inflamed
this is inflamed by politicians above
all um the
conservative Home Secretary sella braan
who just sees her job or saw her job
before she she was finally got rid of as
inflaming hatred that is not the job of
a why would she we're already in a
sensitive time situation why would a
politician do something like that what
could they possibly gain well it is
unfortunately very easy to see what they
gain return to the C this is a I mean
this is about the suffering of the
people of Gaza and
Palestine but the is also this terrible
crisis has
highlighted
a a moment of collapse in in Liberal
democracy the global system which has
has governed the world since as a whole
since
1945 and something very frightening is
happening the attack on liberal de
democracy is not coming as before World
War II in the 1930s when it was the axis
p uh molinis Italy Germany Japan which
which took took down the global world
world order it's actually the liberal
democracies themselves now which are
taking down the global World Order and
what you're seeing in politicians like
braan and there's other ones of generic
others members of the cabinet they're
encouraged by the British prime minister
sunak who isn't strong enough really to
deal with this and across Europe of
course uh what you're seeing is the the
the emergence of a new vicious right and
in Britain we're seeing an attempt to
capture the conservative party by a a
group of people who are much closer to
the afd in Germany or the for National
in France how do you close the gap I
mean look the fact that it sounds like
politicians are using this for their own
game like it'ss like it is a game to
them how do we close this Gap how do we
stop that I well we I think first of all
we need to wake up to the fact that and
and Gaza has has sh has shed a huge
light on this there is
a a a there is an assault on human
rights
democracy everything we fought for for
so long across the
world but but and we have a fight we
have a fight in Britain I feel this we
have a fight on our hands to preserve
the kind of De relatively look I mean as
you know there's plenty of faults in
Britain uh but the a political structure
which was pluralistic and decent and or
tried to be and which will and stop it
been captured by very bad people and
it's not obvious that we can win this
fight but this is what we've got on our
hands you can see the same thing going
on in the states I mean where it's it's
almost terminal I'm going to to finish
how I started and again with your
words you said I pray that I'm wrong but
I fear Western leaders are now
establishing the political Foundation
that would leave us complicit in
massacres indiscriminate bombing and
ethnic cleansing now we all know that
you know hindsight is
2020 how will history look back on the
western governments in this conflict
well I I think I wrote that very early
on in after after October the 7th and
unfortunately those words have been
completely
Justified and I think the enormous
unbearable suffering of the Palestinian
people can in a some way you I think in
a way the Palestinians do represent the
whole world the suffering of the world
The Underdogs
the the poor the hope the people who are
op pressed rest and I think through
immense Carnage and unspeakable
sacrifice
maybe the Palestinians watching all of
this can change the entire world and
make us learn
something let's hope so um Peter oborn I
really appreciate you being here Center
Stage today thank you so much
conversation
you